[Music]
what is the legal definition of
rational thought what is rational choice
defense attorney boris potenski said
those are the key words
for justice anne malloy to define when
she delivers her verdict
alec monassian has pled not criminally
responsible
for killing 10 people and injuring 16
others on april 23
2018. manasseen's defense believe his
autism spectrum disorder
has rendered him unable to understand
that his actions were morally wrong
alexander westfall is a forensic
psychiatrist from yale university who
specializes in autism
he testified minassian displayed classic
signs of the disability
including impaired social skills but
most striking was his
lack of empathy reading from a previous
ncr decision
by the supreme court potenski
highlighted the accused
must possess the intellectual ability to
know right from wrong
in an abstract sense but he or she must
also possess
the ability to apply that knowledge in a
rational way
to the alleged criminal act a lack of
remorse
the defense argued this is evidence of
it alec minassian
alone in a police interrogation room so
the the targets
who are the targets for the this
uprising be all of the
alpha males all the alpha males so the
chads
yes so that's those are the people that
you want to kill yes
okay all right and who else any of the
stacies who uh
do not wish to give their love and
affection to the incels
so they they they're a target as well
yes just hours before minassian had
driven a rented van into pedestrians
killing 10 people and injuring 16 others
but the defense argues he is not
criminally responsible
because he could not appreciate what he
did was wrong
okay what about the normies we don't
necessarily wish to uh
kill the normies but we do wish to
subjugate them in order to make them
understand
that our type is uh the more superior
one right right
so when you say subjugate what you mean
by that meaning uh either imprison them
or put them in a lower position in
society
so that they acknowledge the incels or
the
pepe the frog types as the more superior
ones so i want to put the autism issue
to rest so i brought in an expert her
name is elizabeth largeson
she's an autism expert and assistant
clinical professor here at ucla
dr largeson please tell us what you
think about this issue
is as it pertains to asperger's in this
case
you know as you've discussed dr drew um
asperger's which is a high functioning
form of autism it's it's a diagnosis
that's characterized by difficulty with
social communication and developing and
maintaining meaningful relationships
with people but it's not characterized
by aggressive behavior now that's not to
say that people with
asperger's don't engage in violent
behavior it's just not part of the
diagnosis so how did you learn of elliot
i saw one of his posts we just talked
about each other and got to know each
other
and we found each other very interesting
we both had the same uh frustrations on
society
right despite being separated by
distance so far apart
right right his act i know took place in
2014 but i wasn't aware of the exact
date what day was it may 23 uh 2014
may 23rd yeah you said that so when did
you last speak to him
may uh 20. and so what did he tell you
he told me that
he has to go he is on a very important
mission
and he might not make it back alive so
what did you say to him
i uh kind of had an idea in my head of
what he was
planning but i didn't want to i think it
was true at the time
so i said sorry replied and said i wish
you
good luck with that in a trial held in
virtual court
menacing's lawyer presented his client's
diagnosis of autism
as the basis of his defense and
questioned his father
vaheminasian told the court his son was
gentle
but rarely showed empathy and didn't
understand consequences of his action
when you say radicalized what do you
mean by that meaning i felt
it was time to take action and not just
sit on the sidelines and to just
fester in my own sadness okay i was
thinking that
i would inspire a future masses to uh
join me in my uprising as well the crown
argued minassian grew up in a loving
home
would have known killing people was
wrong i was fairly confident that others
would be inspired to
repeat the same actions as me
basically just to overthrow society
manassian's father broke down when he
told the court he keeps wondering what
signs he missed and says he can only
conclude his son didn't truly understand
what he did
a defense the crown will continue to
challenge when court resumes tomorrow
joanna rumiliotis cbc news toronto